**JOSH:** Hello, and welcome to Clearer Thinking with Spencer Greenberg,
the podcast about ideas that matter. I\'m Josh Castle, the producer of
the podcast, and I\'m so glad you\'ve joined us today! In this episode,
Spencer speaks with Derek Sivers about objective truth, formulating
opinions, and judging fault.

**SPENCER:** Derek, welcome.

**DEREK:** Thanks, Spencer, I\'m excited to talk to you.

**SPENCER:** Yeah, me too. And I want to jump right into something that
I suspect we\'re going to disagree on a lot, which is this question: is
it true that almost nothing is objectively true?

**DEREK:** Ah, so I\'ve got this on my mind a lot lately. It\'s the
subject of the book that I\'m writing right now. I think we can all just
choose where to draw that line between what you consider true and what
you consider not true. But for me, I find it useful to draw the line as
far to one side as possible, so that basically only if it\'s completely,
absolutely, necessarily, objectively, empirically, always true, and not
from any particular perspective --- even an alien observing us through a
telescope from outer space would say that it\'s true --- then I consider
it true. Otherwise, I consider it not true, which doesn\'t mean it\'s
false. It just means it doesn\'t fit that criteria; it\'s not
necessarily always objectively empirically true. So the reason I think
it\'s important to draw that line as far as you can to one side is
because, once you just say something is true, it closes it, no further
questions. As soon as you say something is not necessarily true, it
opens it to further questioning. You can reconsider it; you can consider
a different perspective. So I just find it useful to consider almost
everything to be not necessarily true.

**SPENCER:** Can we divide things into false statements, true
statements, and then conditionally true, which is stuff in the middle
where it will sometimes be true, but it depends on the context? Does
that capture this idea of not necessarily true, that middle ground of,
well, it\'s true conditionally, it\'s been true in certain
circumstances, it\'s true with the right assumptions?

**DEREK:** Right. It\'s funny. When I\'m talking about this with
friends, I say, look, we live in a social world where people say things
like, \"This city\'s dangerous,\" or, \"You need to call your mother.\"
\[laughs\] And these things are all not necessarily true, right? So I
say, we live in a social world, unless you\'re a scientist \[laughs\],
and then of course, you\'re sitting there dealing with more absolutes,
like, \'Okay, this is how many times this thing happened.\' Or let\'s
look at something that\'s in the news, maybe not this year, but two
years ago like, \"This is how many votes this candidate got in the
election.\" That\'s just something that has a right and a wrong answer.
That\'s what I mean; an alien from outer space could observe this and
say, \"Yes, that\'s how many votes that person got.\" This is not a
subjective thing that\'s up for debate. But even science, any good
scientist will say that you\'re aiming to be less and less wrong, that
even Newton\'s Laws weren\'t thoroughly true to the end, but then they
were useful enough to a certain point. We just keep making models that
get closer and closer to being true or to be less and less wrong. Am I
getting that right?

**SPENCER:** Yeah, that makes sense to me. But I\'m wondering, what do
you see as the problem with people believing in objective truths? Do you
see people falling into certain pitfalls?

**DEREK:** We all have objective truths. But I\'m suggesting people push
the line further to question more things in our social world, whether
it\'s, \"I\'m no good at that,\" or, \"You need to fight to defend your
country,\" things like this that people say as facts, but are really
just one perspective. To them, it feels like a cold, hard fact: \"This
is just true: you need to respect your elders. That\'s just a fact.
There is no questioning that.\" But I like to turn all of these into
questions or, \"Don\'t be so sure about that. Let\'s question that.
Let\'s look at that and reconsider that. There might be a point of view
where you should not respect your elders. There might be a point of view
where you should not obey the law.\" And we need to stay open-minded to
consider those from another perspective. That\'s what I\'m on about.

**SPENCER:** This makes me think about how we are story-based machines,
we humans. And the way I\'m interpreting what you\'re saying is that we
have these stories and we treat these stories as other facts, but
they\'re actually just stories.

**DEREK:** Yeah, and I started thinking about why people do that, and
then I realized when people communicate socially, they don\'t
communicate facts. They\'re communicating perspectives. See, because
facts are as boring as dirt. If you were to only speak in the facts, you
would just be exchanging data information. Computers do that to each
other; humans exchange perspectives because the reason we communicate is
more often for social bonding. Nobody bonds over facts; you bond over
shared perspectives. Or people are wanting validation for their
feelings. Maybe they feel a certain way. Let\'s say, \"My ex was evil.
My ex was an asshole.\" And they want somebody to go, \"Yeah, he really
was. You\'re so right. You were right and he was wrong.\" They want
validation for their feelings. This is why we connect, why we
communicate, also social signaling, people sharing their point of view
on something to help identify their tribe and bond with their tribe.
That\'s why people are communicating. It\'s never the facts. It\'s all
about sharing your perspective on it. But these perspectives are shared
as if they are truth, and usually go unquestioned. And that\'s why I
find this subject fascinating lately, to question these things and
realize that\'s not truth; that\'s just one perspective.

**SPENCER:** If we imagine tribal people 20,000 years ago, sitting
around the campfire and exchanging stories, some of those stories might
be about how to survive, like, \"Oh, I went down to the river today and
I saw these berries, and I thought they were this kind of berry, and I
ate some and then I got sick.\" That seems like a very fact-based story.
Although it\'s a story, it\'s rooted in the facts of reality. And then
there might be other stories where, \"Oh, I saw so-and-so and they were
interacting with this person, and I think they were flirting. What does
this mean in terms of their other partner?\" and so on. And that story
is more about social reality. And then you might imagine, there\'s a
third kind of story that\'s really about identity, \"Oh, I saw one of
the people from the other tribe, and they\'re so bad. And I\'m such a
good tribe member over here.\" \[Sivers laughs\] I guess what I\'m
getting at is, even though we\'re story-based machines, it seems like
there are different kinds of stories trying to impart different sorts of
information.

**DEREK:** Yes, totally agree. And I love the way that you broke it down
like that. By the way, I\'m happy for you to tell me I\'m full of shit
and wrong on this. Sometimes, we write a book because we\'ve got
something we want to tell the world. But this book for me is a subject I
just wanted to dive deeper into and learn more about. So I actually
started writing this book. Well, I started (quote, unquote) \'writing\'
this book a year ago, which really meant that, for the past year, I\'ve
been reading a ton about this subject of subjectivity. Also, I really
knew nothing about religion, so I\'ve been spending the last year
learning about the religions of the world and their beliefs, trying to
understand why people believe what they believe, looking at the world a
bit like an anthropologist, and the thing you just said --- about around
the campfire and different kinds of stories --- I\'ve been thinking
about a fictitious translation machine, so that when somebody says
something like, \"Oh, don\'t do that. It\'s a disaster. You\'re going to
fail. No, I highly recommend you don\'t do that,\" what they\'re really
saying is, \"I tried that once and I was disappointed.\" That\'s the
factual story. If they\'re speaking just in facts, it\'s, \"I tried that
once, and I was disappointed.\" But instead, the version of the story
that people usually tell is predicting the future. They say, \"Oh, that
won\'t work for you. You will fail if you do that,\" or \"Doing that is
the worst.\" You know what I mean? They turn what could be a factual
story and spin it into a certainty about the future.

**SPENCER:** They\'re projecting into a generalization. They\'re going
from facts to generalization. It\'s the generalization that they\'ve
constructed that they\'re sharing.

**DEREK:** Again, because it\'s more the human social bonding instead of
just communicating the facts. I often also think about the job of a
police clerk at a police station late at night, when somebody comes in
and says, \"Hey, what this guy did to me\... He walks up, and he\'s just
all like, \'Yo! I\'m \[growls\],\' and I\'m looking at him. And I\'m
like, \'This guy looks like trouble.\'\" And you can imagine the police
clerk sitting there going, \"So a man walked into the store. That\'s
what you\'re saying. Once we take away all this interpretation, the
actual observable fact is, the man walked into the store where you were.
Okay, next fact, please.\" And can you imagine doing this on a social
human level with all the things people say about, \"This is bad and let
me tell you what\'s going to happen in this world. This country\'s going
to hell,\" all these things that sound like certainty about the future.
Or it gets interesting when you start thinking about the past, too. We
tell stories about the past but we don\'t just list events; we list
events with our interpretation of what those events meant, or how we saw
those events. But there\'s always more to the story; people filter their
stories about the past. So the past isn\'t true, meaning necessarily,
objectively, absolutely true. The future isn\'t true. Perspectives
aren\'t true. I just find this very useful to remind ourselves how
little of what people say is true, and how little of what we think is
true.

**SPENCER:** It seems like part of what\'s going on is compression. If
you could list a bunch of facts about what happened about (let\'s say)
some event in history --- World War Two --- you could just list a ton of
facts, thousands of facts, millions of facts. But that actually
wouldn\'t help someone understand it that well. So you need to do some
compression to say, well, what does it all mean? How do the facts fit
together into something that is a causal story of A happened, and then B
happened, and this led to C, which was the thing we actually care about.
And in doing so, you have to pick the facts to focus on, of the millions
of facts that you could choose from, and the particular relationships to
highlight and those not to highlight, and that seems, in part,
necessary. It seems that there is no way to just give someone
everything. There is always going to be a selection process.

**DEREK:** Spencer, that\'s a beautiful way of putting it. I love that.
Thank you.

**SPENCER:** Thanks. \[laughs\] Another thing this makes me think about
is the way that the same exact story can have different connotations.
You gave this example of a person going into the police clerk and
describing someone walking into the bar. But take the word \'slut;\'
what does the word \'slut\' actually mean? It\'s something like, \"I
think that this person is interested in having sex with a bunch of
people, and it\'s bad and I judge them for it.\" Whereas, someone else
could describe it in very neutral terms, \"Oh, this person has had 20
partners,\" or 50 partners, or whatever to them is a lot of partners. Or
someone could describe it in a positive way; they could say, \"This
person is really sex-positive,\" or, \"This person is really amazing at
sex.\" A lot of times, we take a fact and then we just add some emotion
on top of it and our words sometimes represent that emotion.

**DEREK:** I love that. You\'re right; it can be built into a term
itself. Even if it sounds like we\'re not using adjectives, some words
have the judgment built into it. That\'s a great point.

**SPENCER:** This is part of why I think one has to be really careful in
communicating with loaded words because you just are gonna get all of
these bundles of associations, even if you say, \"Well, I\'m gonna use
the word \'slut\' here but I don\'t mean it in a bad way.\" It\'s like,
no, you\'ve already failed. \[both laugh\]

**DEREK:** Right. Just a few months ago --- funny timing --- I went to
Israel for a week in late September, just a week or two before the Gaza
stuff happened in October. Before going there, I read a book that was
the history of Israel, and then I read a different book that was the
history of Palestine. And the history of Israel book was wonderful. It
was fascinating, but so deeply flawed, because it was an almost perfect
book, except she so often used loaded adjectives to talk about the
\'brave, courageous founders,\' and the \'cowardly, timid terrorists\'
that attacked them. And it\'s like, \"Oh, you could have been so much
more believable if you just edited out a few of those adjectives.\"
What\'s funny, though, is the history of Palestine book was --- I don\'t
want to use the word \'autistic,\' which might have some kind of
judgment to it --- but it was like the stereotype of the guy that will
just list out 1000 facts with no social awareness that everybody has
left the room. So the Palestine book was talking about Israel in these
terms, delegitimizing it, saying, \"It\'s not even a real place. In
fact, here\'s a list of 450 people that changed their names from their
birth name to sound more Jewish when they founded Israel in 1948, and
here are their names.\" And the next 35 pages are lists of hundreds and
hundreds and hundreds of names, what it used to be, what they changed it
to, and what their role was in the founding of Israel.

**SPENCER:** Reminds me of the Bible a little bit. \"And then so-and-so
begot so-and-so\...\" \[laughs\]

**DEREK:** Deuteronomy, yeah. And I thought, \"Oh, man, see, this book
is flawed, too.\" I love what you said earlier about how we need to
compress to tell a story; otherwise, it\'s just 1000 facts. So the
history of Palestine book listed 1000s of facts where I wanted a story.
And the history of Israel book gave me more of a biased story than I
wanted.

**SPENCER:** And neither were what you were hoping for? You wanted the
unbiased story?

**DEREK:** The Israel book was almost perfect. In the title, it\'s
called Israel, the World\'s Most Misunderstood Country. That\'s the
title of the book. I guess there was a hint right there in the title
that there was going to be some editorializing here, but it was an
almost perfect book. I would have just edited out maybe 30 or 40
adjectives in the book, and it would have been perfect.

**SPENCER:** Unfortunately, I think it\'s one of those topics where
it\'s almost impossible to get someone who\'s really a third party
who\'s neutral, who\'s just analyzing it from that perspective. And I
think maybe in practice, one of the best things you can do is dig into
each perspective, try to deeply embody it temporarily, until you can
speak like an ordinary Palestinian citizen, you can speak like a member
of Hamas, you can speak like a conservative Jewish person living in
Israel, you can speak like a liberal Jewish person living in Israel, and
so on. And once you have all those perspectives, it doesn\'t mean
they\'re all equally valid, it doesn\'t mean they\'re all equally
correct, but to actually get the closest you can to being unbiased, you
should be able to represent every view and then step back and say,
\"Okay, now that I can represent every view, what is actually the
triangulation of what\'s really going on here?\" Almost impossible to
do.

**DEREK:** Yeah, you might not even need to do the triangulation. I\'ve
been thinking about\... By the way, I just want to pause for a second to
say, when I was just there in Tel Aviv in September, it was my second
visit to Tel Aviv, but my previous one was 19 years ago. And I loved it
so much that\... Originally, I had intended (I think) five days in Tel
Aviv, and then I was going to go into the West Bank for two days. But
actually, I enjoyed it so much, I was like, \"I\'m coming back next year
and I\'m going to spend a whole week in the West Bank. I\'ve spent
almost a week in Tel Aviv. Next year, I\'m gonna go spend two days in
Jerusalem then five to seven days in Palestine.\" And then now, with the
Gaza stuff, it looks like that might not be so possible. But what you
just described is what I was hoping to do, like, \"Okay, I\'ve sat and
met with 34 Israelis here in Tel Aviv. Now I want to go to the West
Bank, and sit down and meet with at least 34 Palestinians that grew up
here, that can tell me their perspective.\" I want to, like you say,
embody. I want to understand both. I want to really deeply have friends
in both and understand the Palestine point of view on this whole thing,
and have a personal connection on both sides. That\'s what I was hoping
to do by coming back for longer next year. But oops, we\'ve got to
remember that we might not\... Expect to do something in the future, you
might not be able to. So in hindsight, I wish I had done it then. It\'s
one of my minor regrets.

**SPENCER:** I wonder though, if taking that approach would actually
piss off both sides. What do you think about that?

**DEREK:** Oh, that\'s fine. \[laughs\] I mean, yeah, it\'s such a
heated subject. I\'ll tell you actually a real concrete thing that
happened. On my way into Tel Aviv, I spent a day in Dubai first, and
specifically spent the day with an Emirati man from United Arab
Emirates, whose name is Muhammad Qasim, an old-school Arab guy, family
goes back to Abu Dhabi and the Saudi Arabia Peninsula over 1000 years.
But he\'s a very open-minded guy that\'s really into understanding
traditional Arab culture. He recently had just gone to Palestine. I was
asking him about it, like, \"Who should I meet? Who do you know?\" So he
said, \"Oh, yeah, I was just there a couple of weeks ago. But now see,
Israel and the United Arab Emirates just recently made an agreement so
that basically United Arab Emirates is one of the few countries in the
region that acknowledges Israel\'s existence or legitimacy.\" So
Muhammad was in Palestine eating at a restaurant. And when the
restaurant owner found out that he was from United Arab Emirates, he
said, \"I\'m sorry, my friend, you must leave. Get out. I don\'t want
you in my restaurant because you are friends --- your country is
legitimizing Israel --- so if you\'re friends with them, you can\'t be
friends with me. Get out of my restaurant.\" And even though Muhammad
Qasim is just the nicest damn guy, he just put down his plate and he
said, \"I acknowledge, I am sorry you\'re upset. I consider you my
brother and I understand you\'re upset. I will leave your restaurant in
full respect.\" And it was amazing, him telling me that this had
happened and his perspective on it because, to him, he has Israeli
friends and he has Palestinian friends and some people are going to be
upset. So that\'s okay. It\'s good to understand why people are upset
and not avoid it.

\[promo\]

**SPENCER:** Imagine if someone murdered a family member of yours, and
then later you found out someone who is friends with the murderer. It\'d
be very natural to be, \"How could you associate with that person?\" And
I think we can all understand that on an individual level. But I think
that, in something like the Israel and Palestinian conflict, it triggers
that but at a group level. It\'s like, \"That group murdered the people
I love, or the loved ones of the people I love. How could you associate
with them?\" And I think at the individual level, if someone\'s actually
hanging out with a murderer who murdered one of your family members, I
fully support it. At the group level, it becomes trickier because
suddenly, now, everyone in the group is to blame, which is
unfortunately, I think, a vast oversimplification that can cause
tremendous harm.

**DEREK:** Right. Yeah. It\'s also values. If you think, like you did,
down to the personal individual level, there are some people that
believe you should not even associate with that person that wronged
someone I know. Or somebody else would say, \"Oh, my belief is, there\'s
two sides or there\'s more sides to every story. If you want to be
friends with him, go ahead. I can\'t be friends with him, but that\'s
just me. Do what you want. I won\'t hold it against you if you\'re
friends with him.\" Years and years ago, when I was in the music
business, I was running a company called CD Baby that was pretty
successful. I was the founder and so everybody in the music business
treated me really nicely. I would walk into a room and the VIP would
say, \"Derek Sivers! Hey, man, how are you doing?\" and be really nice
to me. And a publicist I once met said something about this guy, (let\'s
just say) this VIP. She said, \"Oh, he\'s such a jerk. He\'s such an
asshole. He\'s so rude to me.\" I said, \"Wait, what? Are we talking
about the same guy?\" She goes, \"Yeah, he\'s nice to you because
you\'re Derek Sivers. I\'m not you so he treats me like shit.\" \"No
way. Hold on, I want to see this in action,\" because we were right
there at the party with this guy. So instead, I walked up with my
publicist friend, and I was just like, \"Hey, Tracy, have you met
Thomas?\" (Making up the names here.) And he\'s like, \"Oh, Tracy, nice
to meet you.\" And later when we walked away, she goes, \"Yeah, he was
rude as fuck to me just ten minutes earlier. But now I walk up with you
and he\'s nice.\" It\'s funny that everybody, just on a very micro
personal level, has their different value systems of, we should be nice
to everybody, versus I\'m only going to be nice to people that can help
me, or I\'m only going to be nice to somebody that has never wronged
anybody I know, internal value systems of what we believe is right and
wrong and what you should do. And that usually comes from observing our
parents or peers around us.

**SPENCER:** Did you find that having people kiss up to you in that
industry started to distort your sense of reality?

**DEREK:** I just saw it all as a game anyway. Often, I didn\'t know
that it was happening at first. The guy I was just talking about, I
really thought he was just a really nice guy. But no, he was only nice
to me. But on the other hand, then who\'s to say? Almost everybody in
our life that we could think of as nice, is probably mean to somebody
else. But we think of them as a nice person; we just don\'t know the
whole story. So then you just zoom out into that big level of, well,
then who\'s to say anything? I don\'t know. If somebody is nice to me,
then they\'re nice? If they\'re nice to anybody, then they\'re nice?
Where do you draw the line? How do you define it? When everything
becomes so ambiguous like this, there\'s a tendency to say, \"Well, then
how do we lock it all down and decide?\" Like you just said, the
triangulate. Okay, you spend a week in Israel, you spend a week in
Palestine, you embody a bunch of different points of view. And then
afterwards, you can triangulate and try to figure out what really
happened. There\'s almost this tendency to want to lock it down and
decide. But then that\'s what I just recently started challenging. Maybe
we don\'t. Maybe we just use all of this understanding of different
points of view to turn it into a big giant shrug and just say, \"Well,
see, it just goes to show, there\'s no one right answer.\"

**SPENCER:** The problem is that sometimes you have to make a decision.
Then what do you do? \[laughs\]

**DEREK:** Ah, right. Well, then, yeah, if you actually have to act on
something, then maybe information has to guide your actions.

**SPENCER:** I agree that a shrug is a pretty appealing thing to do when
you don\'t have to act. You\'re just like, \"Wow, that\'s complicated. I
don\'t want to be involved. I don\'t want to make a decision.\" But
sometimes you have to make a decision. Imagine you\'re Biden; you have
to decide. What do you do? Are you gonna give more money to Israel, or
you\'re gonna give money to Palestinians? You\'re gonna put pressure on
Israel?

**DEREK:** Right, but most of us are not Biden. Yet so many people feel
a need to take a side. Whereas, I think it would be healthier, whether
in this silly kind of social media --- changing your social media icon
to be blue and yellow to show that you stand with Ukraine, or to change
it to something to show that you\'re against this, and for this ---
everybody wants to pick a side. Again, back to the first thing we
started talking about, the reason people communicate is for social
bonding, for validation. I think it would be healthier if more people
just shrugged and said, \"You know, that\'s a complex subject. There are
many different points of view on that. Who am I to pick a side? And
luckily, we\'re not Biden; we don\'t need to act.\"

**SPENCER:** I totally agree that people seem to feel pressure to pick a
side for social reasons a lot of times, and there\'s something that can
be quite unhealthy about that, if you\'re just picking a side, trying to
signal something or to try to avoid criticism from the people around you
who are going to judge you. Obviously, it makes sense to want to blend
in and to not get criticized and to want people to like you; that\'s all
very reasonable. It\'s just that, if you\'re professing to have a
viewpoint that you don\'t really have, then it seems like there\'s
something problematic about that. On the point of triangulation, I find
it very healthy to try to have an opinion but be very flexible in that
opinion, knowing that you don\'t know that much and being ready to
adjust it quickly as you get new evidence. In other words, if you don\'t
have an opinion at all on something, there\'s a certain mental laziness
to that, where you\'re not even trying to take all the facts and put
them together. If you have an opinion, but you stick to it really
strongly, then you\'re being unjustified because, well, you don\'t
really know very much. Why are you sticking to your guns on something
you don\'t really know much about? To me, what I feel is the healthiest
middle ground --- for myself, anyway --- is to form an opinion but know
that I don\'t know that much and be very quick to update it as I get new
information.

**DEREK:** I like that. I guess it comes from not needing to tie your
identity so strongly to a point. If your identity is more like, \"I\'m
Spencer. I\'m curious. I\'m smart. I like evidence,\" then that can be
your identity instead of, \"I stand for Palestine,\" or, \"I\'m against
you, Russia,\" and picking a side in the topic du jour. The problem is,
I guess, if people feel that their identity is tied to picking a side
and, now that they\'ve spoken, they\'re not going to hear any evidence
against what they\'ve tied their identity to, because that threatens
their identity. Whereas, yeah, if you keep your identity tied to only
\'I\'m curious, I\'m analytical, I\'m open-minded,\' that\'s healthier.
I like your description of that.

**SPENCER:** The danger of tying your identity too much to any of these
particular answers to questions is that, sometimes, you\'re gonna be
horribly wrong, and then you\'re doubling down on something really bad.

**DEREK:** Yeah, one of my best friends is Jewish in New York City. She
was crying last time we talked just a few days ago. She said, \"I\'ve
actually lost some dear friends in the past month, lost them socially,
because they\'re minorities in America. They feel aligned with (say) the
Black Lives Matter movement. And so when this thing in Gaza and Israel
happens, they feel emotionally attached to side with the oppressed
minority. And so then they take the Gaza/Palestine side, and therefore
need to proclaim themselves to be anti-Israel. And so suddenly, friends
I\'ve had for 20 years are suddenly mad at me and saying they can\'t be
friends with me anymore because they\'re mad at Israel and I\'m not
anti-Israel. So they can\'t be friends with me anymore. This sucks, man.
I\'m losing friends. Some of my best friends aren\'t talking to me
anymore because of what\'s happening in Gaza and Israel, even though
I\'ve only been to Israel for a few days of my life. I\'m not Israeli.
I\'m Jewish.\" But this doesn\'t feel fair that people are just picking
an emotional side and alienating friends because of it.

**SPENCER:** Yeah, I find that heartbreaking. I find it especially
heartbreaking when people are good on both sides of an issue and
they\'re hurting each other. It\'s like both sides are trying to do
something good and right, and the outcome is people are crushed
emotionally, but maybe also literally. I think this issue in particular
has been so difficult to navigate because there\'s the perspective of
Israelis, ordinary citizens who feel like they\'ve been under attack for
much of their lives. Their relatives were attacked in the Holocaust, and
they\'ve grown up feeling like others are going to attack them. They
have felt literally attacked in their own city with bombings and things
like this. So you\'ve got that perspective. Then you have the
perspective of ordinary Palestinians who\'ve felt like they\'ve been
second-class citizens. They felt like they have been oppressed for as
long as they can remember. A lot of them were literally children when
Hamas was elected. And so you\'ve got that perspective. Both of those
sides, I can just empathize deeply with, and it\'s just a terrible
position to be in, in both of those situations. Then you have Hamas who,
from my point of view, Hamas is a group with a very fundamentalist
ideology. It\'s an ideology that is completely antithetical to my
values. And so I feel pretty good saying, \"Yeah, I really don\'t
believe in what Hamas believes in, fundamentally.\" But that\'s very,
very different from saying, \"I\'m opposed to what the ordinary
Palestinian thinks or wants,\" which I think is very different from
Hamas.

**DEREK:** Right. Yeah, for what it\'s worth, the flawed history of
Israel book --- I just remember the author\'s name, Noa Tishby --- it\'s
actually a very, very, very good book, if you can roll your eyes at the
\[laughs\] editorializing a bit and just see through that. We\'re right,
I think, to say it\'s intellectually lazy to just shrug and go, \"I
don\'t know. Who am I to know?\" But I think I am often intellectually
lazy by that definition. See, \'lazy\' is one of those words like
\'slut.\' It\'s loaded.

**SPENCER:** \[laughs\] It\'s got a negative judgment on the behavior,
yeah.

**DEREK:** Oh, by the way, so is \'smug.\' That\'s a related aside. The
word \'smug,\' I think, means being proud that your actions are aligned
with your values, that you\'ve made yourself proud. It\'s feeling good
about yourself.

**SPENCER:** Except for the negative judgment around it, right? That\'s
the extra connotation.

**DEREK:** Right. So I think \'smug\'\... Yeah, actually, I should talk
about that. I\'m still writing the book right now. Words like slut,
lazy, smug, can actually be neutral words if you just ignore the
judgment. Anyway, so, lazy\... I\'ve got an 11-year-old boy that is a
huge part of my life. I spend at least 30 --- sometimes 40 or 50 hours a
week --- just one-on-one, just me and him, no distractions, all other
things off, just me and him doing things together for at least 30 hours
a week. And I work on my writing (let\'s say) at least 40 hours a week,
and I read a lot. So between those two things, I don\'t have a lot of
time for other things. I don\'t play tennis. I\'m not learning to speak
Italian. The list of what I\'m not doing is infinite because I really
focus all my time on just a few core things. So when something comes up
--- let\'s even just say whether it\'s Ukraine or American politics or
something --- and somebody expects me to have an opinion, I just go, \"I
don\'t know. I know nothing about it.\" They\'re like, \"What are you,
lazy? What are you, intellectually lazy? Why do you have no opinion?\"
\"Because I don\'t have infinite time.\"

**SPENCER:** You should be an intellectual slut. That\'s much better.

**DEREK:** \[laughs\] There you go. But it\'s funny that lazy can be
smart. I\'m a computer programmer and, in programming, often, the term
\'lazy\' is used in a positive sense. \"He\'s a very lazy programmer,\"
so he finds the easy way to do things, which can be a positive. So I
guess it could be the same intellectually to say, \"He doesn\'t think
about things he doesn\'t have to think about,\" which sometimes we
celebrate in little quirky ways, like Einstein just had ten of the same
suit; he didn\'t want to put any brain power towards deciding what to
wear that day. Who knows if that\'s true or not, but people say, \"Look
at that. There\'s somebody who\'s so focused on his work that he\'s
decided that certain things are not worth thinking about.\" We may think
about that positively. That\'s how I think about most of the current
events in the news.

**SPENCER:** And that\'s a completely fair point. And I actually think
it\'s very wise to avoid thinking about things that are not in line with
what you\'re trying to do in your life. It\'s just that if you spent ten
hours learning about something and you still have no opinion, I would
say, \"Well, maybe you should have an opinion, but you should know
you\'ve only spent ten hours, not 100 hours or 1000 hours, and be ready
to update quickly.\"

**DEREK:** Yeah. I guess most of the things that people are all up in
arms about in the news, I\'ve hardly spent ten minutes on. I think the
Israel thing was just funny because I was just there talking with people
for a whole week. I didn\'t do the usual tourist thing. I didn\'t go
around and sample the sights. Instead, I just met with people. I wasn\'t
there visiting Israel; I was there visiting Israelis. I just sat down
with 34 people one-on-one, six people a day, all day long for six or
seven days.

**SPENCER:** What was their intro to you? Did someone just say, \"Oh,
meet my friend\"?

**DEREK:** No, it\'s actually just people who know me from my books,
who\'ve emailed me over the years. That\'s actually why I chose to go
there. There were so many people in Tel Aviv that had emailed me over
the years. I actually would have rather gone to Jerusalem for
sightseeing. I think Jerusalem is way more interesting. I find Tel Aviv
kind of boring. But Tel Aviv is where all the people were, and I was
there to see the people. So yeah, I just got a hotel in Jaffa in a
central location, near the best hummus in town --- Abu Hassan, where I
went every morning for breakfast --- and then just sat and talked with
people all day long every day for a week and then went off to a
conference in Cyprus. That\'s the reason I was in the region. But yeah,
so I guess I feel more connected to this issue in the news in a way.
Usually everything else that shows up in the news that everybody gets
all up in arms about, I usually have no opinion. But this one, I feel a
little more connected to.

**SPENCER:** It makes perfect sense. Another thing I wanted to ask you
about is this idea of believing whatever works for you, which is kind of
thematically connected to this \'almost nothing is objectively true,\'
but it is a bit of a different nuance. So do you think people should
just believe whatever works for them?

**DEREK:** Okay, here\'s the distinction. Again, I think I might have
put some words out into the world prematurely as I was forming my
thoughts on this. But it goes like this. In fact, you\'re the first
person that I\'m going to ever tell this to. Have you seen the little
videos of AI characters learning to walk?

**SPENCER:** Yes.

**DEREK:** Okay, great. I love that the researcher isn\'t teaching the
AI character how to walk. They just create a little stick figure with
arms and legs, and just make it exist, and they say, \"Okay, your goal
is to get over there. Go try a million things until it works.\" And
what\'s funny is, when you watch these little creatures trying to walk,
you could just sit there and usually see what the problem is. One of
them is face-down and keeps trying to walk into the ground. Another one
is spinning in circles. Another one keeps leaping up so high that it
doesn\'t get anywhere. And for each one of these, you think\... Okay,
the one that keeps going down to the ground, if I could just put a
little helium balloon on his head, just lift him up, then he\'d start to
see. The one that keeps spinning in circles, if you were to give it some
guardrails, that would help and then it would eventually learn how to go
straight. And I think of this metaphor with people in the world that are
just trying to function, if we use walking to the finish line for an AI
character as a metaphor for people just trying to function and do what
they want to do and go where they want to go in life. From the outside,
you can often see that somebody\'s got some kind of mistake in their
methodology that\'s impeding their progress from where they want to go.
And for those people, you want to give them a little helium balloon on
their head or some guardrails, so they don\'t keep spinning in circles.
To me those things, mentally, are beliefs, that if you have a tendency
to just stay home (let\'s say) and not meet any people, but something
you want to do in life requires meeting more people, well, then you\'re
going to have to do something in your belief system that\'s going to
make you go out and meet more people. You have to adjust your beliefs
somewhat intentionally, like, \"I need to believe that it\'s bad to stay
inside,\" or, \"I need to believe that it\'s good to meet at least three
people a week,\" or, \"I need to believe that it\'s good to talk to
strangers and learn about them.\" You need to adopt these beliefs. So
whether that\'s true or not --- whether it\'s good to meet three
strangers a week, or whether it\'s bad to stay inside and meet nobody
--- of course, that\'s not necessarily, objectively, absolutely true or
not; you\'re choosing to adopt a belief because it works for you for
now. It\'s the belief that you need to correct your behavior or guide
your behavior in the direction you want to go.

**SPENCER:** I think I see what you\'re saying. For a given situation
you\'re in and the given set of traits you have and habits and so on,
there could be beliefs that are not true but that help move you in the
direction of something that\'s better for you or help you get your goals
more reliably. I guess what I would say there is that, for every belief
that might be inaccurate that can move you towards your goals, there
probably is another one that\'s more accurate to the way the world
really is that can also get you there. And I have a pretty strong bias
towards trying to find the accurate, the truer beliefs that get you
towards your goal because I think there are a lot of advantages to those
over just any belief that moves you in the direction of your goal. Maybe
the number one thing is that beliefs that are truer\...and I say
\'truer\' here, not \'true\' because, for the issues we were talking
about before, it\'s not like most beliefs of this kind are going to be
100% true all the time, no matter what. A truer belief is going to tend
to be more likely to be true in more contexts, more aligned with reality
the way Newtonian mechanics is quite aligned with reality. It\'s much
more aligned with reality than (let\'s say) theories of phlogiston. But
it\'s not all the way to 100% truth. We know Newtonian mechanics is not
true. The advantage that truer beliefs have over less true beliefs is
that they actually are also moving you in the direction of reality, and
therefore, they\'re less likely to get you into some weird belief set
where you\'re working against reality. Let me give you an example to
make this more concrete. I have a friend who is using daily affirmations
and the affirmation she\'s using when I talked to her was, \"Whatever
happens to you is exactly what needs to happen to you.\" And I felt like
this is not a very good affirmation. \[Derek laughs\] She felt it was
helpful. She felt it was doing something good for her. But my problem
with it is, \"Well, but what if it\'s not what needs to happen to you?
What if it\'s actually totally the opposite of what needs to happen to
you?\" So what I was suggesting to her: \"Can you find other
affirmations that also do the good things that you\'re getting from that
one, but that are aligned with the way the world actually works?\" It\'s
not like there\'s a law of the universe that says the things that happen
to you are the ones that should be happening to you to help you learn
the lesson you need to learn.

**DEREK:** That\'s a wonderful example. You\'ve gone bowling, right?

**SPENCER:** Absolutely.

**DEREK:** Okay. I think most of us can relate to the thing that happens
if you\'re not a professional bowler. If you go bowling rarely, you grab
the ball and you aim for the middle pin, and it bends off to the left.
And you think, \"Dammit, I must have done something wrong.\" So next
time you get the ball, you aim for the middle pin again; it bends to the
left again. You\'re like, \"Agh, okay, I need to compensate for this
thing where the ball keeps bending to the left.\" So now even though
this feels wrong --- intuitively, I want to aim for the middle --- I\'m
going to make myself aim for the right pin now and hope that it bends
into the center. And then it does. You aim for the right pin and,
weirdly enough, the ball then bends into the center. So you were going
against your intuition and you\'re doing the thing. You know that the
correct thing to do isn\'t to aim to the right. Eventually, you\'d like
to get to the point where the muscles of your forearm and your fingers
and your grip are aligned so that you know it\'s the center. But for
now, I\'m going to aim to the right, and that\'s working. So I think
that\'s kind of what you\'re saying.

**SPENCER:** Well, right. There\'s a difference between then convincing
yourself that, in fact, the right is the center versus knowing, \"Oh,
wait, no, this is just a useful fiction that is not reflective of
reality.\"

**DEREK:** That\'s a good way of putting it. If I were to continue with
the metaphor of the AI characters learning to walk, imagine if you
suddenly gave the AI characters the ability to help each other, and
suddenly the one that was helped by having a little balloon tied to its
head went around going to every little AI character going, \"Everybody!
Balloons! We all need balloons! Everybody put a helium balloon on your
head!\" \"No, no, no, no, no, that was the answer for you. That\'s what
helped you because you were face down on the ground. You needed a helium
balloon. Everybody doesn\'t need helium balloons.\"

**SPENCER:** \[laughs\] That\'s exactly what people do. Everyone finds
one thing that helps them and then they go around shouting, \"Everyone
needs a helium balloon.\"

**DEREK:** Yep. It\'s the metaphor that, yeah, this is what you needed.
It doesn\'t mean it\'s true. It\'s not the answer for everybody. So
that\'s really a big part of what my next book is about, first pointing
out how many things in our social world are set as fact but, in fact,
are just a perspective, not true. And then the horror of realizing that
you\'re doing this, too. So many things that you think of as just
absolutely true --- that even your brain is telling you are true --- are
not actually true. It was just something that you needed to believe in
at the moment, but it\'s not true.

\[promo\]

**SPENCER:** What do you think of what I\'m saying about the advantage
of believing truer things rather than less true things for their
helpfulness? It seems to me that the less true things are more brittle.
They may be helping you now but, because they\'re not as aligned with
reality, they\'re going to do less well, on average, when you go into
different situations.

**DEREK:** I think you\'re right. I think it\'s a great insight. For
practical use, I\'m wondering if that\'s part of the progress. Maybe
like in the bowling example, for now you need to aim to the right just
to not make this next roll or this next game a disaster. But hey, for
the long term, let\'s look at just adjusting your grip or whatever;
it\'s gonna take many more hours of training so that you know how to
accurately aim towards the middle pin or whatever --- start to put a
spin on it --- whatever you\'re gonna do for now versus the long term. I
guess it depends how involved you want to get. What would be some other
real-world examples? Maybe this is just my personal preference; I\'m
happy to temporarily adopt beliefs that I know are not correct, but they
send me in the correct direction. But I\'m aware that I\'m doing them,
things like when I started to learn that most humans have a tendency to
believe that they are above average in common everyday things. Interview
any number of drivers and you\'ll find that about 97% of people asked
believe that they are above-average drivers. I think they interviewed a
bunch of doctors and 96% of doctors said that they felt that they were
better than average doctors, and so on, and so on and so on. On the
other hand, I think when it came to really difficult things --- like
chess and I think actually, even math was in here --- most people
believe that they are below average in math. The things that people
believe they\'re above average in, are everywhere.

**SPENCER:** Yeah, we ran a study on that, actually.

**DEREK:** Oh, you did?

**SPENCER:** Yeah, we gave people 100 different skills. And for each of
them, we said, out of 100 people, how many of those 100 do you think
you\'d be better than at the skill? We found just what you\'re saying.
People think that they\'re better drivers than average and so on. But
the really funny thing is, if we switch it from how good you are at
driving to how good you are at race car driving, it flipped to people
thinking that they were worse than 50 out of 100 rather than better than
50 out of 100. And again, it goes to the point of difficult things and
things you\'ve never done before, people are more likely to
underestimate themselves relative to others; whereas, easy things and
things you do a lot, people are more likely to overestimate themselves.

**DEREK:** Spencer, I love that you did that. When I first got your
email about having this conversation today, I went to your website, and
I was learning about what you\'d done. And I so admire that you\'re
taking this approach to things and, instead of just sitting there
pontificating, you\'re going out and collecting a bunch of real-world
data for people. I love this. I didn\'t know that you had done it on
this subject. To me, then, when I hear something like this, I think,
\"Oh, well, I need to correct that cognitive bias.\" It\'s not just
them; it\'s also me. If most people do this --- if 97% think that
they\'re better than average --- well then, I must be one of those 97%.
Therefore, to compensate for this bias, I\'m going to start to try to
assume that I\'m below average just in general, when in doubt, assume
that I\'m below average. And it might not always be true. But I think
it\'s better for me to try to believe that I\'m below average to help
compensate for this bias.

**SPENCER:** Ah, I have such a different approach. This is really
interesting. My approach is, make predictions about things and then
actually track them and see how well my predictions go. Because my goal
is not to compensate for the bias by pushing in the other direction but
rather, creating an iterative feedback loop where my estimates become
more and more accurate. Does that make sense?

**DEREK:** Yeah, you would do well as an AI character learning to walk.
That\'s the correct way to do it. \[both laugh\]

**SPENCER:** Thank you (question mark)? Yeah, so I\'ve been tracking my
predictions about things for years. And when I have an important event
in my work or my life, I\'ll try to log a prediction about it.

**DEREK:** I think that\'s the ideal way to do it.

**SPENCER:** Do you think that imagining yourself as being worse than
average, does that have negative consequences?

**DEREK:** I don\'t know. I find it works for me which, by the way,
comes full circle to when you brought up this subject: choosing a belief
that works for you. This is very much what I meant. This belief --- for
example, I\'m going to assume that I\'m below average in everything ---
works for me for now because it makes me stop and catch myself when I\'m
feeling confident and think, \"Hmm, maybe I shouldn\'t be so sure. Maybe
I shouldn\'t be so confident. In fact, I should probably be more careful
when I\'m driving because I think I\'m probably a worse-than-average
driver. Therefore, I need to be more careful.\"

**SPENCER:** I think I\'m also a worse-than-average driver, for whatever
that\'s worth. \[laughs\]

**DEREK:** I think that this works for me. Here, let\'s pick another
example that I did blog about a few years ago and it actually was part
of the inspiration for my choosing to turn this into a book. At my last
company, I had 85 employees and I was the sole owner, and a lot was on
my shoulders. And it didn\'t go well. I sold the company really out of
personal failure. Even though financially it was successful, personally,
I just felt like it was a disaster. And so I sold the company for a ton
of money and people said, \"Wow, congratulations,\" but to me it was a
failure. But I found that I was resentful and blamed the employees for
how badly things had gone, even though I\'m not a resentful person
usually. In this case, I was, \"Agh! Those bastards, they did this and
they did that. They were deliberately manipulating and that made
me\...\" And for a year or two, I was in this thought loop of blaming
them for everything, or blaming them for the failure of the company. And
then one day, I had this thought of, \"Wait a minute, what if it was all
my fault?\" That actually made me sit up in my chair, like, \"Oh, wait a
second, if everything was my fault, that\'s empowering now. That\'s
something I can do something about.\" Whereas, believing that everything
was their fault, that just feels victim-y; that feels helpless. Choosing
to believe that everything was my fault, and choosing to see anything
from that given perspective\... Again, there\'s always more to the
story; you can always choose any perspective on any story. If I look
back through the whole past of the company, and assume that everything
that happened was my fault, I created the situation that led them to act
that way. I created the environment where that action was just the
inevitable outcome for them to do --- that was all my fault --- that, to
me, is an empowering mindset that then worked for me. That led me to try
to be a better person. That gave me more tranquility and peace with the
past. That led me to stop being angry at them. And so, like you, I
blogged about it. I wrote a blog post saying, \"I\'m going to assume now
that everything is my fault.\" But some people in the comments said,
\"How dare you? That\'s awful. It\'s terrible. I\'m ridden with guilt
all the time. And for you to suggest that I should think that everything
is my fault, that\'s the worst thing I\'ve ever heard you say. That\'s
the most terrible advice you\'ve ever given.\" Oh, well, then, it
doesn\'t work for you. I wasn\'t saying everyone needs a helium balloon
on their head. I\'m saying I needed a helium balloon on my head. And if
you find yourself lying face-down in the ground, maybe you need a helium
balloon on your head, too. This works for me. If this doesn\'t work for
you, then don\'t. I\'m not saying it\'s for everybody. But yeah, that\'s
choosing a belief because it works for me.

**SPENCER:** Well, where my mind goes when you say that is that, of
course, it was partially your fault. And of course, it was partially
their fault. And of course, it was partially luck as well that was
nobody\'s fault. And so it\'s interesting to me because I think I would
resist a framing like, \"It was all your fault,\" or \"It was all their
fault,\" because it just seems so unlikely that either of those is true.
And that doesn\'t mean that you\'re not right, that what works for you
best is believing it\'s all your fault. What about just trying to see it
as accurately as possible and actually figuring out which parts were
your fault and which parts weren\'t your fault?

**DEREK:** I think two thoughts on that. One, I think that\'s the place
to get to; I think believing that everything was my fault in this case,
was the turnaround I needed to stop thinking everything was their fault.
But then where I get to eventually is, yeah, it\'s probably a mix of
that. But another thing even, fault is --- now I don\'t know if we\'re
picking on the example too much --- but fault is the little ripples in
the water. Where did that ripple come from? Where did that action come
from? And even then choosing to judge someone\'s action as right or
wrong, what are we judging this by, just financial outcome or not? So I
think that I don\'t know if I ever could come to some final judgment
about exactly what was my fault and what was not. I think it\'s all just
a spin. It\'s all just a perspective.

**SPENCER:** Yeah, I guess what I think about in terms of ultimately
arriving at is not so much, \"Okay, it\'s 10% this person\'s fault and
20% that person\'s fault,\" but more, \"Here\'s my best understanding
causally of the events that have transpired and ways that the ideal
version of myself would have behaved differently.\"

**DEREK:** Right. So then it is fair to judge things by whether it\'s
useful to you or not. Is this something I can do something about? Is
this information I can use to improve my actions in the future? I think
about this filter a lot; believing that something is somebody else\'s
fault might make you feel emotionally better in the moment, to think you
aren\'t to blame. But that doesn\'t improve your actions. On the other
hand, if you look at everything as your fault, you might look harder for
ways that you can improve your actions. Sorry, I think we\'re going too
deep down the fault rabbit hole, almost kind of what\'s the lost
perspective on the subject, but do you know what I mean? We\'re judging
analysis through the filter of what can I use in the future?

**SPENCER:** Yeah, and I think part of the reason we\'re so fixated on
fault is because we want to know how to judge people and ourselves. We
want to have a sense, am I a good person? Is that person a good person?
We want to create these overall assessments. And then it seems like we
have to get into the fault. But maybe there\'s a more enlightened view
that just goes beyond that and says, \"Well, this person is that sort of
person. I am this sort of person,\" rather than creating a holistic
judgment. I think about using an analogy of robots. To do another robot
analogy \[laughs\], imagine that there was a robot that\'s programmed to
punch people in the face. And it\'s going around the city, punching
people in the face. And other people are getting really pissed off at
this robot. And they\'re like, \"I went over to the robot and he punched
me in the face.\" My attitude in that situation, the ideal version of
myself would say, \"You know what, this is a robot designed to punch
people in the face. Maybe it needs to be locked up or reprogrammed,\" or
something like this. But there\'s something pathological about walking
up to it, getting punched in the face, and then getting really angry
once you realize it\'s a robot designed to punch people in the face.
This is how I try to go into these situations. What sort of person is
everyone in the situation? What sort of person am I?

**DEREK:** Well, this is such a wonderful, vivid, colorful example. I
haven\'t yet seen how this ties back into what we were just talking
about.

**SPENCER:** Well, because it removes the question of judgment. You\'re
not going to be like, \"Was the robot a good robot or a bad robot? Is
the robot morally to blame or not?\" It just gets to the details of,
well, it\'s a robot that\'s programmed to punch people in the face. How
do we want to act on that information? Do we want to hang out with the
robot? Do we want to lock the robot up? Do we want to reprogram the
robot?

**DEREK:** \[laughs\] I love that.

**SPENCER:** This is how I try to see myself --- well, what sort of
person am I? --- rather than craft a holistic judgment about myself,
like am I good or am I bad. I want to be like, \"What sort of person am
I?\" And same with others; rather being like, \"Are they good? Are they
bad?\" I want to be like, \"Well, what are their tendencies? What are
the sorts of behaviors they engage in?

**DEREK:** Right. That\'s a tough one for me to wrap my head around
because I\'m going to say, I --- I don\'t know if it\'s I or we --- have
a tendency to think of ourselves as changeable but think of other people
as not changeable. Again, I don\'t know if that\'s just me. But I think
something I\'ve read a few different times in these books on behavioral
economics is, we often assume that other people are more motivated by
money; whereas, we\'re motivated by intrinsic desires. And so too often
bosses think, \"Well, I\'ll just give my employees a little more money
to do the job,\" and people that talk about motivation will say, \"No,
no, no, that\'s a bias. That\'s a mistake in thinking that other people
are more driven by money; whereas, you\'re driven by higher motives.\"
Everybody does that. In fact, everybody\'s driven by higher motives, and
money is really often lower down the rank of needs. I think of myself as
a very changeable person. I\'m hesitant to think I\'m a robot programmed
for one function. I think that I contain multitudes; whereas, I do catch
myself accidentally thinking that other people are just that way;
they\'re just a robot designed for one function, and they\'re not going
to change. Maybe that\'s a fault in my thinking.

**SPENCER:** Well, I certainly wouldn\'t say people are just programmed
for one function. I didn\'t mean to imply that people are simple or
anything like that. It\'s more just that people have tendencies and you
can try to understand those tendencies without making a holistic
judgment on, \"Oh, that person is good,\" or, \"That person\'s bad.\"
Just try to really understand, what sort of person are they? What are
the sorts of behaviors you would predict them to engage in in different
situations? And then you can take that view on yourself. But on the
changeability piece, I do think people are constantly trying to change
each other. That is a really common thing people try to do, often
unsuccessfully. When it comes to myself, I think of my behavior as
within my control, at least for the next few seconds, with it quickly
diminishing after that. Well, if I want to get myself to do something
next Tuesday, I have to think about, well, what are the sort of things
that get Spencer to do a thing, and then I have to say, \"Oh, okay,
well, Spencer will check his calendar in the morning,\" and so if I put
something on the calendar, well, that might be a thing that is
motivating to Spencer.

**DEREK:** Yes. Again, that\'s what works for you for now. That\'s not
what everybody should do.

**SPENCER:** Absolutely. Absolutely. It\'s what worked for me.

**DEREK:** Maybe it\'s the Hollywood story arc. It doesn\'t even have to
be Hollywood; I\'m sure many novels do this, too. A writer told me that
you can tell who is the true hero of the story, because the hero is the
one that changes the most during the story. And I thought that was an
interesting way of looking at it --- he was a Hollywood screenwriter
that said this --- that if we think of ourselves as the protagonist in
our story, does that mean that we are the one that goes through the
changing arc, that we used to be this way, and now we\'re this way, or
we\'ve learned this important new insight, or we used to have this
behavior that was working against us and we\'ve learned the hard way,
and now we\'re not going to make that mistake again? Point is, sometimes
the difference between seeming like this kind of person versus that kind
of person can just be a change in a little habit. I used to be a lazy
person, but now I put it on my calendar, \"Go to the gym at 10 am,\" and
now suddenly, I\'m going to the gym every day at 10 am. That was really
the only thing that changed; I just needed to put that entry in my
calendar. But to the outside world, it\'s like, \"Wow, you\'ve made a
huge change. You used to be so lazy. Now you\'re like a total gym
nerd.\" From our own internal point of view, we\'re still the same
person, but just this one thing changed in our actions. I wonder about
the robot that punches people in the face, that a single little change
in the programming to get it to punch a punching bag or something like
that \[laughs\] can change how it\'s seen in the world, from bad robot
to good robot.

**SPENCER:** I think that\'s a great way to look at it. It makes me
think about people with really extreme personalities, like someone
who\'s extremely narcissistic or someone who\'s sociopathic, and
thinking, well, maybe there is a small tweak that gets them to actually
have\... Maybe right now, this person is causing harm, but there\'s a
small tweak in which they actually are doing good in the world. There\'s
a fine line between the sociopath who\'s manipulating people and taking
their money versus the sociopathic lawyer who is working within the
legal system to do the best job possible defending the murderer, where
they\'re actually providing a public service, because they\'re supposed
to do the best job possible defending the murderer.

**DEREK:** Yeah. I saw more than twice in my years at CD Baby, somebody
who came at us full of venom and attack, and contacted customer service,
just like, \"I\'m going to destroy you people into the ground! You\'re
the worst! Just you wait till you feel my wrath!\" And luckily, my first
employee ever was a really sweet guy named John. And John was so nice
that he would get on the phone with these people. And John\'s nature is
just, \"Hey, man. Yeah, oh, I totally feel you, man.\" He\'d sit on the
phone with these people for a whole hour while doing other things in the
background and let these people just vent their venom. And at the end of
an hour --- and I swear this happened more than two or three times ---
the person would turn around, \"You know what, you guys are great. I\'m
so sorry. In fact, I\'m gonna go tell everybody that you\'re the best.\"
And sure enough --- again, I can think of at least two times this
happened, but I think it happened more --- that person then became our
biggest champion and went out into the world loudly like, \"CD Baby is
the best! You gotta sign up with these guys. Hey, every musician, if
you\'re not on CD Baby, you have to be on CD Baby. These guys are the
best thing in the whole world.\" They just had this tendency\...
They\'re like a fountain. They just need to spout and spout, spout,
spout, spout, spout. And they can spout against you or they can spout
for you. But it\'s just a slight tweak in their behavior that our
biggest evangelists usually started out as our biggest critics. And that
was just their personality, slight tweak.

**SPENCER:** Yeah, just redirecting that energy. \[laughs\] Before we
wrap up, I was thinking, how would you feel about doing a quick
rapid-fire round where I ask you incredibly difficult questions, and you
have to give really short answers.

**DEREK:** \[laughs\] Sounds fun. Let\'s try it.

**SPENCER:** Alright, first question: why do you think low confidence
works for you? Because I think the vast majority of self-help books
emphasize that you should believe in yourself. But you\'re saying
believing you\'re less good than other people seems to work for you.

**DEREK:** I\'m coming from a place of high confidence, whether it\'s my
nature or just something I learned early on. Quite often in life, I\'ve
smiled and thought, \"Well, confidence is really all I have right now.\"
I have a nature to be confident. So I think maybe to try to steer myself
back to the middle, I deliberately adopt lack of confidence.

**SPENCER:** You mentioned that your previous business was a financial
success, yet you viewed it as a failure. Why do you think you feel it
was a failure despite the financial success?

**DEREK:** I define success as achieving what you set out to do,
achieving what you wanted. And I mean that on a micro or macro scale. If
I want to go mow my lawn and I want the blades of grass to be short, it
is a success if I do that. I set out to help musicians and to create a
place that was casual and cool and fun to work at, that ignored the
formalities of most businesses. And I achieved that mostly, but then
after the company grew past 50 employees, it took on its weird life of
its own. It\'s like the gravity switched; the focus of the employees
switched from outward to inward. And that\'s the thing that felt like a
huge personal failure to me. Even though the company was making a lot of
money, it turned into a nasty place, internally in the culture. So that
felt like a huge failure. It used to be a fun place to work and it
turned into a nasty place to work. And I also thought I was going to
continue doing it for many decades, maybe the rest of my life. But when
things got so bad, I thought, \"Well, I could fire everybody and start
again. I could go in there and try to fix everything. Or I could just
walk away.\" And so I chose to just walk away, and that felt like I had
given up. So, yeah, it felt like a failure personally.

**SPENCER:** Is there a story you have that you would want to believe
even if it was completely false?

**DEREK:** Uh, yeah. \[laughs\] There\'s my short answer. Yes. All the
time. Many. Constantly. Let\'s just pick one stupid little one off the
top of my head, because somebody emailed me about it minutes before we
hit record. They asked why I\'m social in India, and I\'m not social in
New Zealand. I said, \"I just find people in India to be more
interesting than I do people in New Zealand.\" And I know that\'s not
objectively true. That\'s my little story, that people in India are
interesting and people in New Zealand aren\'t. I know that\'s false but
it is my current story. I didn\'t deliberately choose that one. But if I
wanted to counteract it, I would work hard to deliberately find
supporting reasons to believe that people in New Zealand are
fascinating.

**SPENCER:** Why don\'t you want to stop believing that story?

**DEREK:** I haven\'t felt the need to yet. Right now, there\'s a nice
split in my life, where New Zealand is my place where I\'m antisocial
and I just work and I spend a lot of time with my boy. And when I\'m not
with my boy, I\'m just working. The fact that I don\'t find people
particularly interesting here works for me, because it helps me get more
work done and focus on my boy full time. In fact, it\'s part of the
reason I moved here in the first place. My boy was born in Singapore. I
was living in Singapore; he was born in Singapore, and Singapore is a
place where I find so many people so interesting, and so many people
wanted my time. But I wanted to be a good dad. So I thought, \"Why
don\'t I move to a place on Earth with great nature, great place to
raise a kid, but where I\'m not interested in the people, and therefore
I\'ll give all my social attention to my kid?\" And that\'s why I chose
to move to New Zealand for this reason.

**SPENCER:** My apologies to everyone living in New Zealand who\'s
listening to the show. I hope you\'re not offended.

**DEREK:** \[laughs\] I\'m wincing. I mean, I\'m standing in New Zealand
as I say this. I\'m like, looking over my shoulder. I hope nobody heard
me.

**SPENCER:** Well, now, they\'re definitely not gonna want to talk to
you, so you\'re good.

**DEREK:** Exactly. Yeah, mission accomplished.

**SPENCER:** Why do you think it\'s important to say, \"Hell, yeah,\" or
say, \"No\"?

**DEREK:** That again is a specific tool for a specific situation. My
little article I wrote on it starts with the first sentence saying, \"If
you are overwhelmed with opportunities, consider this trick: basically
raise the bar, to say \'no\' to almost all of them.\" But it\'s only for
that situation where you\'re overwhelmed with opportunities.
Unfortunately, it\'s a catchy catchphrase. And so I\'ve heard from
people around the world saying, \"Oh, my God, I just got out of college,
and I\'m using \'hell, yeah\' or \'no\' for everything from now on.\"
And I think no, no, no, that\'s the wrong time to use it. It\'s a tool
for a specific situation. At your point in your career, you should be
saying yes to everything. It\'s only later when lots of people are
offering you lots of money and lots of situations and you can\'t say
yes, that\'s when you gotta whip out \'Hell, yeah\' or \'no\' and use it
in that situation, not all situations.

**SPENCER:** Okay, just two more questions for you. Do you think it\'s a
good idea to strive to optimize everything we do?

**DEREK:** No. I used to. I used to try to optimize everything, but then
I\'ve found the joy of leaving some things in your life deliberately
unoptimized, leaving them more random, allowing for surprises and
serendipity and maybe just releasing the pressure on some things to not
be optimized. Yeah, everybody has to choose for themselves. For some
people, they would want to optimize the money-making side of their life
and not optimize the personal relationships in their life. And for
somebody else, it might be the opposite; they want to optimize personal
relationships and never mind the money. That\'s not in their current
value system. So no, I think you need to make a self-aware decision of
what aspects of your life should be optimized instead of assuming that
everything needs to be optimized because that\'s what the famous
podcasters do.

**SPENCER:** Final question: what would you say to people who are told
that they\'re weird?

**DEREK:** Ooh, say thank you. I taught that to my kid when he was
(like) three years old. I said, anytime somebody says you\'re weird, say
thank you; that\'s the best compliment. It means you\'re not like
everyone else. You\'re not just normal; you\'re special. You have made
your own decisions, come to your own conclusions instead of just echoing
what everyone else is doing. So I think \'weird\' is a high compliment.
In fact, I think it\'s one of the best compliments you can receive.

**SPENCER:** Derek, thank you so much for coming out. This was really
fun.

**DEREK:** Thanks, Spencer. It was such a wonderful conversation. I\'ve
loved that our brains work kind of differently and I admire the way you
think. And so it was fun to hear your perspective pushing back on\...
Especially because I\'ve been really lost in my thoughts of this book
called Useful, Not True for a year now. Hey, anybody, if you\'re
listening to this all the way to the end, please go to my website and
send me an email and say hello, because if you\'re the kind of person
that listens to Spencer\'s show, you\'re the kind of person I want to
meet.

**SPENCER:** What\'s your website address?

**DEREK:** S-I-V-E-dot-R-S. My name with a dot in it. S-I-V-E-dot-R-S.
And there\'s a contact link. I answer every single email. I actually
really love hearing from people that listen to a podcast like this. In
fact, it\'s the reason I choose which podcasts to appear on; they\'re
the ones where I would like to meet the kind of people that listen to
this show. So that\'s why I\'m here.

**SPENCER:** Thanks so much, Derek.

**DEREK:** Thanks, Spencer.
